[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: 20 years
ago, thousands of hearts
were lifted by the
film "Life After Life"
with Dr. Raymond Moody.
It was a documentary about
near-death experiences.
After interviewing
Raymond Moody a little
while back, he told
me that I needed
to speak with his colleague
Lisa Smartt on her new book
"Words at the Threshold:
The Words of People
Who are about to Transition."
And your book is
just so beautiful
because it really
helps people understand
this really is a transition.
This isn't a goodbye.
It's a transition.
And yet a lot of people are
edgy about even contemplating
death, no less contemplating
the death of their loved ones.
But what I like
about this book is
it gives us an idea of
when the time comes,
we're sitting with someone
who's in the process
of transitioning, it gives
us a guide of how to interact
with them, how to perceive them
and understand them better.
So I really appreciate
the work you've done.
So first of all,
the book is based
on 1,500 different
cases, utterances
of people on their deathbed.
OK.
Maybe just refer to
that, the project
itself for just a moment.
>>LISA SMARTT: The project
is the Final Words Project,
and I founded it in 2014.
And we're actually up to 2,000
final words or utterances.
>>REGINA: Oh, I've got old data.
Very good.
>>SMARTT: Yes.
Just in-- the more
that I've spoken
about this work, the
more people who've
come forward and shared their
stories and accounts with me.
>>REGINA: So now
how did you end up
pairing up with Raymond Moody?
>>SMARTT: Over a three-week
period, my father was dying,
and I wrote down
all his utterances.
And I was very curious
what I had witnessed.
And as a linguist, I wrote
down everything he said.
Because when I saw language
that was so baffling to me,
it was difficult not to write
it down and try to figure out
what was going on.
And so I thought
back to some books
I had read way back
in my early days
as a teenager and young adult to
try to shed some light on what
I had witnessed.
And I remembered
Dr. Moody's book.
And synchronistically, a
couple months after my father
passed away, a friend
of ours told us
that he was doing a seminar
with Raymond Moody in Alabama,
and would I like to join him?
And I went out to Alabama.
And the fourth day
the seminar, Raymond
started talking
about final words.
And he had mentioned he'd been
looking for a linguist who
might one day work with him on
this whole topic of what people
say in those last
days, weeks, hours.
And I was just struck
by the synchronicity
and a relationship
was born right then.
>>REGINA: Well, he spoke
very highly of you.
And so I think I contacted
you right after I interviewed
Raymond a few months ago.
So OK.
Let's go with the words
of one very famous person
because I just love it so much.
So I want to toss it
out right up front.
And then we're going to go into
what happened with your dad.
OK?
So in the words of Steven
Jobs just before he died,
the words were, oh wow.
Oh wow, oh wow.
>>SMARTT: His words are the
ones that might be most popular.
Many of us have heard.
But what's remarkable is in
bedrooms or in hospital rooms
throughout the country,
even throughout the world,
words like that are
being heard privately.
People are seeing
remarkable things oftentimes
as they leave this world.
>>REGINA: I've loved that.
I mean, of all the
things he'd seen
in this life, what he had seen
over there was unbelievable.
And so I mean, that's
almost like an invitation.
What'd he see?
I can't wait.
And of course, I
think there were times
that Raymond Moody's film--
it did make people
feel like that,
like the experiences that
people had in near-death
and the freedom and liberation
and the absolute vast awareness
that they had--
transcending time
and space even--
was almost like a lovely
invitation in a way.
And I mean, I remember back
when the movie came out--
the film came out-- people
saying, oh god, I can't wait.
So now, let's go to your dad.
And you wrote the book because
of those final words, as you
said, but also the
nature of his words
because angels spoke
to him and gave him
very direct information.
And he did not
believe in angels.
So let's talk about your
dad in those final weeks.
>>SMARTT: Well,
this whole feeling
of it being an aspirational
time rather than something
to be frightened of was
really captured in what
I saw in my father's last days.
Because this is a man
who believed in nothing
beyond this world.
Matter of fact, he was a
New Yorker, cigar-chomping,
kind of-- you know,
New Yorker skeptical--
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: Angels weren't
part of his lexicon.
>>SMARTT: Angels were
not part of anything.
As a matter of fact, if I ever
mentioned anything like that,
he'd roll his eyes.
And so-- and this is what struck
me so much with his final words
was that he started
to talk about things
that in his ordinary
life he would have never,
ever mentioned and in ways that
he had never spoken about them.
So about 10 days before he
died, he woke up from resting.
And just, his eyes popped open.
And he said, Lisa, you were
right about the angels--
because I had spoke in the
past about angels a bit.
And I said, what do you mean?
And he said, there are angels.
So that, I noted that and
was blown away, but also,
obviously, really intrigued
and wanted to know more.
And three days
before he died, he
announced the angels say,
enough, enough already, enough,
only three days left.
And indeed, three
days later, my father
passed on very peacefully.
And the angels being
in the room with people
is something we hear often
in the data I have collected.
And also, people
seeing something up
here is also very common.
>>REGINA: And your
dad's final words,
which were not dissimilar to
Steven Jobs and many others--
but I love it.
He said, I have never
done this before, Alice.
I have never done this.
>>SMARTT: Yes, and this
is interesting was the--
I have never done this before.
And those words
were the ones that
pushed me into
knowing that I had
to spend the rest of my life
investigating this topic,
because I wondered,
what is this "this?"
What is this "this" my
father is talking about?
>>REGINA: And some people do
give you little hints of it.
We'll move further into
the story in a bit.
Let's talk about this
event when you woke up
at 3:15 in the morning.
>>SMARTT: Raymond
talks about something
called a shared
death experience.
Well, of course, at
this time, I didn't
know Raymond's term
for this, but I
had an experience where I woke
up at 3:15 in the morning.
And I was living in
Napa, California.
And I looked at the
red digital clock,
you know, the red digits.
And I saw 3:15.
And I felt this heaviness in the
room, as if there were people.
You know how if
the lights are off
you can feel there is presences?
>>REGINA: Yeah, presences.
>>SMARTT: And but there--
it was so thick.
And I woke up my husband.
And I said, I wonder if
my father is dying now,
because there is such
an energy in the room.
And I wonder what's going on.
And he said, honey,
get some sleep.
And by 3:26, I
was back to sleep.
I remember looking at the
clock and going back to sleep.
And I came into Berkeley the
next day to check on my father.
And I asked my mom,
how is dad doing?
She said, he's fine,
but the strangest thing
happened at 3:15 in the morning.
And I said, yes?
She said, yeah, he woke up.
And he said, it's
so crowded in here.
What are all these
people doing in here?
And I thought that was so
fascinating, because my dad
and I both had the same
experience at the same time
miles--
70 miles apart.
>>REGINA: And three time
zone-- oh no, 70 miles, he
was in the same
time zone as you?
>>SMARTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK, you were--
>>SMARTT: So at the time--
>>REGINA: --at the same--
>>SMARTT: --I was in--
>>REGINA: --time zone?
>>SMARTT: California.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>SMARTT: And now I have come
to know that that's called
a shared death experience.
And it's actually
much more prevalent
than we may have known
before, as we're doing
more research into that area.
>>REGINA: Yes, now,
sitting with someone
going through the
process, the transition,
one thing you bring
about in this book is
the notion that the final
thing to go is hearing.
Well, I mean, the final
final thing is consciousness,
but that the final
sense to go is hearing,
because a lot of times we
can't see them responding,
and we just assume there is no
one home, but that's not true.
>>SMARTT: That is not true.
Madelaine Lawrence has
done beautiful research
with coma survivors.
And many people who
come out of comas
talk about what they have heard.
And there are two
things that go on.
One is there is more increased
telepathic understanding
as people are in comas, which
I might talk about later also.
But they're hearing.
They're hearing a lot.
They're hearing more
than we may ever imagine.
And every medical provider
I've spoken to in hospice
has said that the hearing
is the last to go,
And that really, how important
it is for us to say kind words,
because people hear them.
And also there is something
called terminal lucidity.
Right before people die,
there is a flash of lucidity.
And that's often a time when
we know that people have
heard more than we thought.
You know, they may
say something like,
well, I heard Uncle Bill
say that I never loved him,
but I did.
I've always loved him.
So people are much more aware.
>>REGINA: Yeah, we have
to be careful about that.
And we have to, not only
speak in kind terms,
but speak as though they're in
the room with us and listening.
>>SMARTT: Yes it's
so common for people
to just think that the
dying, especially if they're
unresponsive, are like a couch,
or a pillow, or something,
but they're human beings
with, in some ways, maybe even
more awakened senses
than when they're alive.
And some of the research
indicates that, in some ways,
our senses may be even
more highly attuned.
>>REGINA: Right,
we're not limited
to the physical boundaries
of the senses any longer.
And I know when my mom was
in a coma before she died,
I would just go--
I mean, I would go into another
space and meet with her.
And she could tell
me what was going on,
and what she was aware of, and
right down to the final day,
saying, you can let me go.
I'm done now.
And she did die that night.
But what I saw around
her was beautiful,
because I was going
where she was.
I wasn't expecting
her to come to us.
And she had reverted in
age to a much younger--
I mean, she looked
to be about 19 or 20.
And she was surrounded
by these beings that
were in a little
semicircle behind her,
quietly just there, ushering
her through the process.
And she was saying,
let me go now.
I can go.
I feel good.
I'm ready.
And it really gave
my sister and I
the courage to just be at
peace with the whole thing.
And she did.
She died that night.
>>SMARTT: It's
wonderful that you
had access to that kind
of communication with her.
And that's something I hope that
my work, as well as there are
so many others who are
engaging in this kind of work,
to give them that opportunity
to connect with their loved
ones in the way that I
imagine that you did.
Because I hear this
from nurses, people
who have been kind of
in the closet with it,
who have done it in a
way that was hidden--
but now people are
coming out more
openly about being
able to communicate.
Maybe it was for
you telepathically,
or some other way.
I'm hearing these
stories more and more.
And they seem very,
very-- they are real.
They are real.
And I'm a linguist, so my
interest was in communication,
or has been in communication.
What I didn't
expect when I began
this research is that it
would open the door for me
to talk and think
about telepathy.
And that is-- I mean, now I am--
I was a linguist.
Where it used to be, there
was a range of communication
like this, now that range
of communication for me
has expanded to
something much larger.
>>REGINA: No, it's beautiful.
And it shows in the book.
I'm going to top off that
little story after my mom left.
She died.
My sister in particular was
more kind of attached to my mom
in a way of, oh god,
I miss you so much,
where I tend to kind of go
with the flow of what is.
But what happened one
night a little while later
is, she came into my dream
at night, and said, you know,
I keep coming here because
you guys are calling for me.
And she was exhausted.
And I said, mom, don't
come from where you are.
Don't come from that
realm back here for us.
You do not need to
drain yourself that way.
Don't do this for us anymore.
You already live in our hearts.
She came to my sister the
same night in her dream.
My sister didn't talk
with her in that way.
And at that, I told my sister
what had happened in my dream.
She shared hers.
And my mother did not come
back again in dream time.
>>SMARTT: It tingles.
>>REGINA: So what
happened is, we
can bind them here
during the death process
by not wanting to let them
go, but we bind them afterward
also if we're not careful about
it and just wish them well.
>>SMARTT: I think
that's very true.
And you know, Raymond's research
with near-death experiences,
and mediums who have spoken to
those after they have passed,
and even my own experiences
now, really, there
is a sense that the spirit
is so much happier and freer
once it's out of the body.
>>REGINA: Yes, it has things
to do on the other side.
It doesn't need to be having
us drag them back here
all the time because
of our own emotions,
emotional attachments.
>>SMARTT: One thing
too that caught
my attention when
you were speaking
is that you said that she was
younger, in a younger form.
And that is something
that Raymond's research
and other people's
research-- that oftentimes,
in near-death experiences when
we see our deceased friends
and relatives, they're
in a younger form,
or they come back in our
dreams and they're younger.
And I always find
that interesting.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and when
she came back in the dream,
she was that same age, had
a little green t-shirt on.
>>SMARTT: That's fascinating.
>>REGINA: The other
thing I've noticed too--
and this is not with the
dying, but it feeds into it.
And that is, the notion of
people with dementia who
are no longer connected,
like someone who is in a coma
or in their transition,
those with dementia who
are no longer appearing
to be present in this time
frame and their cognitive
skills are gone,
they're still feeling us.
We don't understand
how much that,
what we embody in this field
the auric field around us
is what's really communicating
with other people
and especially those
who are now nonverbal.
>>SMARTT: That's very powerful.
Yes, right, I think
that's very true.
And another piece of that,
a lot of the work that I've
done with the dying has to do
with metaphorical language.
So I worked with this
woman in Pennsylvania
who works with
people with dementia.
And she had her staff start
tracking the metaphors
that people were using.
And so many times,
people are picking up
what you're saying
in the auric field.
And they're using
metaphors to talk about it.
So it's sort of doubly veiled.
And that when her staff
started tracking--
and they would actually put
it in the people's files
or in a charts, what were the
stories and the metaphors that
the residents were using--
these connections
started to occur
between the residents
and the staff,
but also with the families,
because suddenly, lights
started going on
about, oh, you mean
when she keeps talking
about the apple,
she's really
referring to our son.
And so that what seemed
like crazy dementia--
and I'm not saying, I
mean, obviously dementia,
there are ways that there
are big disconnects.
But there are also
ways of connecting.
And metaphor is one of them.
And just as with
the final words,
we started tracking over time
with the metaphors were--
we've found too
that, in some cases,
this can also be true
with people of Alzheimer's
dementia-- that if you track the
stories or the narratives that
are going on, it's a way
to enter into their world.
And there is more going on
than you might imagine, almost
like the dream world.
And also people with
autism sometimes
will do this too,
will say things,
and that they're picking
up on energetic things that
are going on but using symbolic
ways to speak about them.
>>REGINA: Yes, and
it occurred to me
because I was thinking about
this particular situation
where there is no one really
present in terms of relating
to on a conscious level.
But she recognizes our auras.
And she knows when
she feels safe.
Because there was
some talk, does she
go into a care facility now?
And in this case, it's
my dad and my step mom.
And my dad's like, no, I
don't want her to be afraid.
Even if she doesn't know
me, he gets and understands.
She feels him.
And she feels safe.
And she feels me.
What happens when you
think someone's not
cognizant of their
surroundings and you just
put them in a strange place?
Oftentimes, people die
quickly after that, right?
>>SMARTT: Absolutely,
yes, that is true, and I--
>>REGINA: And I think
that's part of it.
They don't feel safe anymore.
They're missing the auric
fuel that's been feeding them
the whole time.
>>SMARTT: We're living in a
very exciting and amazing time.
And our research in this
area is just accelerating.
And I've been involved
in this for six years.
And I've seen it explode.
And when you're talking about
being responsive to people's
energetic fields,
you can imagine
what might be possible
in terms of how
we create end of life
for people in tuning
into these kinds of energies.
And you know, on one hand, of
course losing someone we love
or seeing someone go into
the process of dementia,
those are painful things for us.
And yet, if we can hold
them and imagine them
in a way that has to do with
more energetically, and almost
more ritualistically
and ceremonially,
it offers us a chance to, A, not
be so afraid, but also really
connect with the
sanctity of what's
going on when it can sometimes
seem so awful, and scary,
and horrible.
>>REGINA: Exactly, yeah,
and well, in her case,
she's very socially
gracious, and charming,
or has been her whole
life-- cute as can be.
And so for her, she
always had a way
of kind of flirting with
people by winking at them.
And so she winks.
You know, she'll see you.
And she doesn't know what
the conversation is about,
but she feels you.
And she winks.
If you wink back, you can
just feel this joy that's
happening on this subtle level.
But one of the
things you talk about
is that the left hemisphere,
attached with logic, language,
and so forth, is
usually the one that
starts shutting down
first in the final process
of transition, where the
right hemisphere still seems
to be more engaged and alive.
And one of the examples
you used that I love
is, one dying man
spoke of the beds--
his bedside lamp being
attached to the sun.
>>SMARTT: Oh, I know.
That was--
>>REGINA: He could see--
>>SMARTT: --incredible.
>>REGINA: --it.
And so this is a way in
which, it's not make believe.
It's artistic association--
and on that note,
that poets and artists tend to
live in this zone consciously
a lot of their lives.
You talk about that in the book.
>>SMARTT: Yeah, and I think
part of my attraction to this
is I studied linguistics.
I did a very traditional
academic study of language,
but I'm also a poet.
And I love poetry.
And I noticed with my father's
language, he said things,
you know, my modality is broken.
Or there is so
much so in sorrow.
And the example you just
gave about the lamp post,
and that person also said--
or the lamp at the bedside,
he also said, worlds, worlds,
worlds, and more worlds,
he said.
So what's fascinating
to me about the words
at the threshold and the
more I have studied it,
it's almost a mythic
and poetic realm.
And if you have an
ear for the poetry
and you open your
heart to that poetry,
again, it's something
that can be much less
frightening and more magical.
And my hope with the
Final Words project
is to-- it's actually an
invitation for everyone
to become aware, and even maybe
write down the language they
hear from their loved ones.
Because really, when
you freeze it in time,
oftentimes it's actually
very beautiful language.
>>REGINA: Yes, well
it makes sense.
If your left brain is
shut down, the right brain
is going to express
itself in its way, which
can be symbolically, right?
>>SMARTT: And also, a lot of the
nonsense-- we talked about some
of the nonsensical things.
Especially as people
get closer to dying,
there might be
nonsense syllables.
And we know for
example, glossolalia,
which is speaking in tongues
which many people describe
as creating states
of ecstasy, that--
they've done now
neuroscience research
to show that, when people
are speaking in tongues,
their right brain is activated.
So it seems that the nonsense
that we may hear at end of life
may actually be closely
aligned to those kinds
of ecstatic or mystical states
that are associated with that,
those regions in the brain.
So it's fascinating.
Oh you know, a
koan, a zen koan--
you know, what's the sound
of one hand clapping?
That is nonsense technically.
And yet that's the
kind of language
that invites us to enter into
different states of being.
>>REGINA: Well, let me now
just go ahead and jump forward
to something I would
have brought up later.
But since you bring this
up, another phenomenon
is people speaking in a
language that they don't know,
but a real language,
but they didn't know it
in this lifetime,
which is beginning
to show an arc of time
beyond time, perhaps,
other incarnations, perhaps.
>>SMARTT: Yes, and it's rare.
It's rare, but it does occur.
And just the fact that
it occurs is in itself--
it catches your eye.
I haven't found
enough cases, but I
do know I've heard of of-- just
actually in the Final Words
project, there
were three people.
But it's something that,
you can't help but hear
about something like that
and wonder, what it--
>>REGINA: It's in
there aura somewhere.
It's coming from--
>>SMARTT: It's in
there somewhere.
>>REGINA: --somewhere.
>>SMARTT: And also, we
haven't done research on words
at the threshold except for
the Final Words project.
So who knows what
data is out there
that we haven't collected?
>>REGINA: Well who
knows, once this
goes on for a few more
years-- it's still relatively.
>>SMARTT: Exactly,
it's very new.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and so the
other thing that I think is
disturbing probably to the world
of science and medicine is that
the experiences don't appear
to have anything to do with
the physical brain--
which, to me, it's just a CPU.
It's just a processing unit.
Intelligence and data all
lives outside of the brain.
In my view of it and
my understanding of it,
it's more quantum.
But this is perplexing
to the world
of science, which might
be why there hasn't
been more research, right?
>>SMARTT: Yes.
And I think, however,
we're going to see,
and just in the next five
years, more and more research
in that direction, or in
this direction, and also
more acceptance, because
there is just too many cases.
And I would not have believed
it before I did this research,
but it's very clear to me.
You even look at the work that
Dr. Kenneth Ring and Sharon
Cooper did with
the blind, people
who were blind from birth.
And when they had near-death
experiences, when they left
their bodies, they had vision.
So how can that go on if
we're talking about just
being physical beings?
>>REGINA: Yeah, uber
sight happens elsewhere.
>>SMARTT: Uber sight, exactly.
>>REGINA: I think another way
to engage the medical field
is that doctors have
also been present
when someone who
is passing over,
or in near-death
experiences in particular,
have known what the
doctor was going
to say as a doctor
is still thinking it
and hasn't uttered it yet.
So they're going into the
thought field with them, which
happens with the dying as well.
>>SMARTT: Yeah, I
think that is true.
And then you have someone
like Eben Alexander who
has come out with proof of
heaven, Tony Cicoria who
was a orthopedic surgeon,
was struck by lightning,
and came back with an
incredible musical gift.
So Missouri Medicine
just did a whole book
on physicians who have had--
themselves have had
near-death experiences
and are sharing with
their colleagues
that this is
something very real.
So again, it's a very exciting
time to be alive right now.
>>REGINA: Now, because we have
the various memes in culture
and the materialist end of
it through, for example,
pharmaceutical advertising
and such is this great--
I mean, really, we have been,
as a species, manipulated,
because we've been
encouraged to fear death.
Look at the amount
of manipulation
that happens to our psyche
because we fear no longer
existing.
And that's why I
think the work of you,
and Raymond Moody's, and
others is so important
to help break the spell.
So it's like, no, it's natural--
and in the case of most of
the world's population--
and I'll be back again anyway.
You know, there is a
time for everything.
It's a wheel.
These are cycles.
So I mean, to me, it's really
important that you're making it
an understandable and also
a beautiful invitation,
ultimately.
So another thing
here is, you say
in the book that telepathy
may be our original form
of communication anyway.
And I know others
who would argue that.
And you gave an example
of Yukiko and her mother.
>>SMARTT: Oh, yes, Carrie Rush
Willis, who is a chaplain,
shared this story with me.
Yukiko was someone that she
was, I guess, ministering with,
or being with.
And she started talking about
her mother being in the room.
And Carrie was
with another woman
who said, no, Yukiko, your
mother is in Japan, no, no, no,
no.
And she said, yes, I've
been communicating with her.
Well, then the friend went home
and called Yukiko's mother.
And the mom said,
yes, I was having
telepathic communication.
And they were able to verify.
They were talking
about the same things,
about a sister in the
family, and so forth.
And again, we're finding out how
common those kinds of shared--
in a way that was a shared
death experience also,
because the daughter was dying.
And telepathy, we hear about
it near-death experiences.
I hear it from hospice nurses
all the time, where they know
when a patient's going to die.
They hear the patient
saying, I'm ready now,
so then they can
tell the families.
It's just, the more
work I'm doing,
the more I'm reading about it--
>>REGINA: The more magical.
>>SMARTT: --the more magical.
And then the research from
Jeffrey Li and Jean Metzger
looking at children and parents,
and seeing so much evidence
that, really, the way we're
communicating with our infants
is telepathically.
When you think about it, we have
these little itty-bitty babies.
And many times,
we're so connected
with these little beings.
And how so many of us make it
through childhood-- infancy
is such a vulnerable time.
And they did some
fascinating research
to show that there seems to
be clearly a telepathic bond
between parents.
I mean, none of us who
have kids are going
to be real surprised by that.
But they suggest, it's
our first language.
Our first language,
is telepathy.
And then we develop the
traditional left-brain skills
as we get older.
And then it seems at the end, we
go back to a more telepathic--
>>REGINA: No, it makes sense.
The left brain shuts down as
you're going through the death
process.
And it only fires
up slowly when you
re-enter this world at birth.
>>SMARTT: It seems
like an arc to me.
You know, when
we're born, we have
the mechanics to speak up to--
we could speak 800 phonemes.
We could respond to 800.
But by the time--
within six months,
that narrows to just the
phonemes of our language.
So we come in with
this vast capacity.
And within six
months, it narrows.
Our identity and who
we are is partially
defined by the language
we're going to speak.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
and you think about that,
the beauty of that, to begin
exiting this body where you no
longer have a need to
function, so you don't need
the functional
aspect of the brain,
which is like to order yourself
so you don't run into things
and you get things done,
the left-brain side--
and it has its role in science.
But the reality is, almost every
genius in the world of science
says that they had almost a
spiritual breakthrough, even
if they don't use the word.
That the breakthrough
came in dream time,
or day dreaming is when their
great theory came to be.
So again, it's
always the right side
of the brain that's creating.
So we don't need that
narrow aspect of the brain
when we're transitioning out.
And we don't need
that narrow aspect
when we're just
coming back into it.
>>SMARTT: But I'm inclined to
think that it may have to do
that, when we first come into--
>>REGINA: They're not
shut down and narrowed--
>>SMARTT: They're not shut--
>>REGINA: --by the
left side of the--
>>SMARTT: They're not narrowed.
>>REGINA: --brain, the left
hemisphere, absolutely.
Yeah, that's fascinating.
And also, you say
the same thing.
You mentioned this earlier--
Asperger's, for example, a lot
of precognitive and telepathic
abilities because the
traditional language centers
may not be as fully developed.
>>SMARTT: Right, it sounds
like those people are
more in the realm of
symbolic understanding
as well as energetic.
And so the words
aren't always there.
And we know, with the
near-death experience,
of course one of
the first things
that Raymond noted about
it in "Life After Life"
is ineffability, ineffable.
People cannot find
the words for it.
So there's so much of who
we are as human beings that
has no language attached to it.
And so what we see at
words at the threshold is
this unraveling and also
this shifting of how language
is used and expressed during
this time where people-- like
when my father said,
this is so interesting,
or I've never done this
before, it just could be,
there was no other way
except "this" to explain it.
>>REGINA: Or like with Jobs
and others, oh wow, oh wow,
there is no framework
at all, just--
>>SMARTT: Exactly, ah--
>>REGINA: Wonder-- another thing
is time and space, because it
tends to be circular
and all happening
at one time with people.
So again, as the structure of
the left hemisphere breaks down
and the creative realm
becomes full-blown,
time and space doesn't exist
the same in the creative realm.
>>SMARTT: Yes, and one of the
things that I've learned about
sort of left brain functioning,
it has to do is sequencing
and linear--
being able to put
things in linear time.
And so what goes on for
people outside of linear time,
of course, is this
has no time or space.
You know, when people talk
about life reviews, many times
it's instantaneous, kind
of instantaneous awareness,
or knowledge, or information.
And so part of what
we do is, we have
these stories that we live.
And we have these narratives.
And they are structured
in linear time.
That's what our lives are about.
But it seems that, as we end,
all that linear-ness just
disintegrates and opens
up to something else.
>>REGINA: It just
seems to me that
is a wonderful message
to us, that we don't have
to be living in those boxes.
Why wouldn't we be living
like that all the time?
The language is there.
If you're not disintegrating,
the language is there.
The function of being able
to make a meeting on time
is there.
But the thing that stops
us from actually living
in that creative
magical realm-- which
is where life is actually
happening, we start with
and we return to.
And that's a whole
other question
of allowing ourselves to be
programmed to such an extent
that we can't live those
beautiful moments while we're
actually here.
>>SMARTT: I agree.
And I think that it's
about integrating.
It's all, for me, very much
about what this life is about,
is integration.
Because, of course
we need language.
I couldn't be sitting here with
you and connecting in this way
and connecting with other
people without language.
However, there is this realm--
and again, the realm
that I was able to enter
through doing the
research, I continue
to enter through doing
the research, that I'm
so grateful for, because it
has expanded my own awareness,
and my own comfort, my
own joy, and my own life.
And you know, my
mother is an artist.
And so I grew up with the arts.
And I'm very grateful.
And she was dyslexic,
so she was never very--
you know, she didn't
think of herself
as being good with language.
But she lived in
another way, in terms
of imagery and visual reality.
And that is as valid.
I mean, but
integration to me is--
>>REGINA: But it is
absolutely undervalued
in our modern
materialistic world.
>>SMARTT: I agree.
>>REGINA: And part of it is
because you can't control it.
And I mean, I'm even
thinking on a personal level.
I had a conversation recently
with a business associate.
And they were trying to get me
to state, what is your plan.
What is your master plan?
And I said, I don't have one.
And she read an early
version of my book,
which is just about out.
And she said, I didn't
think that was real.
I mean, I read the book.
And it does seem like you
certainly go with the flow.
But she couldn't
understand how can you
get from A to B without a plan.
And when you understand that
it's more listening instead
of demanding-- and
I know that there
is a place for both, where you
do have to have an intention.
But in my mind and my
world, I'm listening
to see where the energy is.
I'm looking to see where
my excitement is happening.
And then I start following that.
And that becomes--
people think it's a goal.
It's not a goal.
It becomes a
creation, so to speak.
But it's very disconcerting
for other people
to know there is no plan.
You know, what can
you hook on to?
Instead of just having
faith-- you'll see.
Watch what happens.
It emerges.
>>SMARTT: Isn't that a much
more magical way to live?
>>REGINA: I don't know any
other way to live, personally.
But it's very irritating
for everybody around me.
>>SMARTT: No, but it's
true, because then you're
co-creating with whatever is.
And one of the things I've
learned so much from doing
this research is listening.
And I'm working right
now with someone who
had a near-death experience.
He's the person
Kevin Braheny Fortune
who did "Hearts of Space."
I don't know if you recall that
music that was pretty popular,
I guess, in the--
>>REGINA: Not right off--
but I may remember
it if I heard it.
>>SMARTT: Yeah, but sort of
the first techno music-- but he
had a near-death experience
and heard this music
from his near-death experience
and brought it back.
And he was describing
to me this process
that he calls deep
listening that came
from his near-death experience.
And this has also
happened for me
through doing "Words
at the Threshold."
And the near-death
experience also
teaches those about
deep listening.
And I love the idea
of deep listening,
because it feels like it has
changed my life, because this
is what's going on.
When the dying speak to us,
we're used to-- this is a cup.
And this is all this is.
But when the dying speak, a cup
may be a million other things.
And we have to listen carefully.
And you know, Regina, if you
were in meditation or prayer
and the cup showed
up for you, it's
going to be different
than the cup for me
and what it may mean.
And for me, that's kind of
the magic of deep listening.
>>REGINA: I think
that, for me, it's
one of the exciting
things about the book.
It's not just talking
about the dying.
It's actually opening
up a whole world,
as I mentioned just a little bit
ago, that we could be living in
while we're here during
our Earth years here too,
and access to that by
that deep listening,
even deep listening
to higher self,
or whichever voices
we wish to hear.
>>SMARTT: Yeah, I'm
so excited to hear
you say that was one of the
things you got from the book,
because it's something
that was a gift to me
from doing the research.
And it's almost as
if, in so many ways,
the dying or teaching us.
And this is one of the
many lessons of the dying.
And you know, after
my father passed on,
I woke up one morning.
And I heard him speaking to me.
And I just wrote down.
He said, I want you to give
some love poems for your mother
because I know how
much she is grieving
and how much she misses me.
And I just trusted it.
And over a period of a
year, these poems came out.
And it was very beautiful
and healing for me.
Now, someone could go,
oh, that wasn't your dad.
That was just your
blah, blah, blah, blah.
You know, that was
just your imagination.
OK, but these beautiful
poems came from it.
Or maybe it wasn't
my imagination.
We don't know.
But there was this co-creation
with that voice that
was very rich and beautiful.
And I've lived my life
much more that way.
And I mean, I moved
to Georgia so I
could study with Raymond Moody.
I mean, and it was
the best thing.
I would have never
imagined moving to Georgia.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
so all of this
has shown you how to engage
with life not with death, even
though it's about
words at the threshold.
>>SMARTT: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And I think
that's a huge takeaway
lesson here for all of us.
>>SMARTT: Yes, absolutely.
>>REGINA: The other
thing that happens
when people are making
their transition
is, they go to areas of passion,
including your dad, right?
>>SMARTT: Mhm, he went to
a couple areas of passion.
Not situations that
you have in mind,
but I'll tell you the
ones that I recall.
He was a horse race.
He loved the horses.
>>REGINA: Oh, with a cigar.
>>SMARTT: And so he talked
a lot about the big gamble,
and the gambling,
and all of that.
That had multiple meanings.
He talked about Marilyn Monroe.
>>REGINA: Oh, wow, poster girl.
>>SMARTT: And let's see,
what other passions--
tell me.
>>REGINA: One of them was,
he was talking about he was
attending an art exhibition.
>>SMARTT: Oh, well that was
a very meaningful passion,
indeed.
And that is what began
the dying process.
My father one night-- it
was actually my birthday--
just, my mother was
upstairs in their bedroom.
And he had fallen
asleep in his study.
And then he walked out the
front door in his underwear,
January night in California,
Berkeley, California,
walked down the
very busy street.
And when the police came
and said what are you--
what's going, sir?
He said, I'm looking for
the big art exhibition.
I've got boxes here I've got
to take to my wife's art show.
And this, I came to find
out once I did the research,
this is very common.
That oftentimes, as
death is approaching--
and we didn't know how
sick my father was.
But now it's some
kind of big event,
and something that's very
close to their heart,
or is their passion, as you
said, something very dear.
And for my father, 56
years of carrying the boxes
to my mother's art exhibitions
was very dear to his heart,
and very meaningful.
So for him, the big art
exhibition was coming.
Well of course, the police
thought he was crazy,
brought him to the hospital.
And my mother was contacted.
And it was from
there on, my father
moved in to the dying process.
And we brought him home, but
it began with that big art
exhibition, taking those boxes.
And interestingly
enough, boxes appear
a lot in the language
of the dying, which
has multiple meanings, I
think, in terms of what
we carry with us, so yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I
found that beautiful.
Another one was Andrea was
speaking about her grandmother
going through the process.
And her grandmother asked her to
bring her best dress and shoes
to the hospital, put on
her makeup and jewelry
for the big dance.
She loved the big dance.
And she got her all dolled up.
And she died.
She was ready for the big dance.
>>SMARTT: And the big dance was
pretty common in final words.
Multiple people
besides Andrea just
describe that
their loved one was
getting ready for a
big event such as that.
>>REGINA: And also, the
notion, like I brought up
about my mother, once
the big dance happens,
is this notion that,
like, this crowded
feeling in the room, this crowd
of beings, or in my mom's case,
this semicircle of beings
who were just glowing,
that they are light beings.
Even people call them
angels, oftentimes.
But that the room is filled
with all these other beings,
how often--
I mean, I don't expect you
give an exact percentage--
but is that pretty common?
>>SMARTT: It is very common.
And other researchers,
David Kessler
has written about this
quite exhaustively.
Christopher Kerr spoke about it.
And in Christopher
Kerr's research,
they said that 72%
of their sample--
and I think it was 500 people--
had some kind of beings in the
room, deceased loved ones--
>>REGINA: So we don't go alone.
>>SMARTT: We don't go alone.
And this is very much, I would
say were many of our samples--
I want to say probably
mid-70%, same thing,
having conversations with
deceased loved ones and family
members.
And rooms get crowded
before people pass on.
This is a very common
thing that I've heard
and I've seen in
the transcripts.
>>REGINA: And also, how
about the people that
are in the rooms with them?
Is it common for
them to experience
kind of a fullness in the room?
>>SMARTT: That's
a great question.
I don't know how common it is.
I think people are
becoming more and more
comfortable with honoring
what they're feeling.
So I think, I would maybe
say 20% of the time.
I mean, I think we'll hear
more stats in the years ahead.
>>REGINA: And as also people
dial in and get comfortable--
>>SMARTT: Yes--
>>REGINA: --with talking--
>>SMARTT: --as people--
>>REGINA: --about it.
>>SMARTT: --dial
in, I love the way
you say that-- yeah, dial in.
>>REGINA: Another one
I loved, this is--
I loved some of these anecdotes.
And this one is, he told me--
this is about Jack.
He had been a
vaudeville musician.
And he had told
the hospice worker,
you will see a great magic
trip today-- trick today.
Come in.
And he kept saying,
closer, closer, closer.
Now, watch me disappear.
And he died.
>>SMARTT: Exactly.
>>REGINA: I love it.
>>SMARTT: Isn't that amazing?
>>REGINA: Oh, a totally
masterful trick.
>>SMARTT: Yes, and using
the metaphor, the signature
metaphor, because he was
a vaudeville magician.
And of course, what
would be the language?
>>REGINA: Make
something disappear.
>>SMARTT: And make
>>REGINA: I love it.
Another one, numbers
come in a lot of times.
And someone waiting
for a game, and said,
yeah, they need a fourth.
I've got to go to my golf game.
They need a fourth.
>>SMARTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: And numbers
coming in, can you
talk a little bit about where
numbers play into the magic?
>>SMARTT: Yeah, this
whole idea of completion,
it showed up more than
I would have expected,
lots of golf going on.
And people will
say, we have three.
They have three, but they need
a fourth for their foursome.
So it might be a poker.
I saw it come up in
the poker example.
So there is three guys.
They have three playing,
but they need a fourth.
And I'm that fourth.
So I'm going to go join them.
And in one case, a
person was saying,
there are three guys
playing poker over there.
I don't know if I
want to join them.
He was at first like,
I'm not too sure.
Oh, they're calling
me and telling me
they need me to come
in and play a hand.
And then finally--
and that's what
I was saying before about
these sustained narratives,
these stories that evolve.
>>REGINA: What do you
think is going on there?
I mean, I know it's just
conjecture at this point
because you're not
there, but what
do you think is
going on by looking
at these stories of
this adding themselves
to make a completeness?
>>SMARTT: Yeah, that's
a great question.
Well, one of the
things with the Final
Words project, that I found this
whole thing about completion.
One person says something
like, the circles
are telling me it's time
to complete the cycle.
One man who was a boat
owner said to his wife,
I've got two holes.
I need to make a whole.
So it makes sense
that people are
beginning to think
about completion,
because that's what's going on.
And so this idea that
there is a threesome that
needs a fourth to make
something complete,
and Jung talks about this.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's where
I was going to go next.
>>SMARTT: It's a number
that's a archetype.
And so when I saw three
to four coming up pretty--
a lot in the transcripts,
it made sense
in the context of a
number of completion.
But it surprised me.
It's something that came
up that really surprised
me, this whole idea
of the foursome,
and that people were
joining as the fourth one.
>>REGINA: And Jung also said
that threes usually mean
transformation of some kind.
And then the four
is the completion.
>>SMARTT: Yeah, the
completing, yes, and one
of the people in this
study, I remember
he talked about seeing a
number eight in the corner.
And it also makes
sense just intuitively
that threes and eights
would show up just
in terms of transformation,
and kind of the affinity side,
just intuitively, I thought,
oh, that's interesting
that people are seeing
different landscapes.
So from one example, a father
described to his daughters
about how there
were three doors.
And he was having a
hard time deciding
which one to go through.
So the daughters said, well
just try each one, dad.
You know, so he opened one.
And he talked about this
big landscape that he saw.
And another one had more trees.
And this is pretty common.
My father talked about
the green dimension.
He said, oh, there
is a green dimension.
There is a green dimension.
And sometimes people will say
just little bits of things.
I mean, they're not going to
give you large explanations,
but those are the times
to maybe ask questions.
Oftentimes, you feel like, oh
my god, dad's not making sense.
What's he saying,
green dimension?
That makes no sense--
but instead going oh,
a green dimension.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that makes
perfect sense, just engage--
>>SMARTT: Just engage.
>>REGINA: --and learn something.
You're going to be having
a glimpse into something
that we don't normally get
a glimpse into day to day.
>>SMARTT: And you know,
when I look back now,
I was so afraid when
my father was dying.
I mean, I had the pad in here.
And I was able to
do it this way.
That's one way I handled my
fear, I think, and my grief.
But now, looking back, if
I could go back in time,
I would have said, daddy, tell
me about that green dimension.
At the time, I was
like, oh my goodness,
what is he talking about?
>>REGINA: He's losing his mind.
>>SMARTT: He's losing his mind.
And I don't know
what to say to him.
And i.
Think one of the things is, you
know, almost the less we say
and the more we ask is
probably the best we can do.
Because one, we don't
want to impose our reality
upon the person who is
transitioning, because they
probably have a lot more to
teach us than for us to tell us
what to do or how to do things.
>>REGINA: And this
is really too,
when they start talking about
green dimensions and such, this
really, again, as a
word to the living,
is where dreams
crossover, where often, we
don't have a problem
dealing with the fact
that we can live in kind of
alternate realities and dream
time, but we think that someone
who's passing into those states
is uttering gibberish when
they try to describe the very
same things we
dream about, which
are worlds that are altered,
worlds that look different,
with more trees, less trees,
fewer trees, bigger, smaller.
It sounds like a lot of people
are going to those places
we dream into anyway.
>>SMARTT: Yes, and very well
developed, you know, people--
and again, these narratives,
someone sees a boxing champion.
He describes a boxing
champion walks into the room.
And then three days later,
oh, now the boxing champion
has got his son with him.
And you know,
they're at a parade.
And this is going on
over several days.
And again, if we
didn't write it down,
we may not have
really understood.
These little snippets
become a story.
And they're vivid.
And in the research that
I've read about dreams says
our minds are very active
when we're dreaming.
So this whole thing
about consciousness,
how could it be, when
technically we're dying,
our brains are not
supposed to be active,
and yet this very rich
kind of dream state
is going on in these final days?
People are hallucinating or
having these visions of things.
And for me, it really convinced
me that consciousness--
that we are more
transmitters or receivers
and that there is
consciousness around us.
>>REGINA: Absolutely,
another thing is vehicles.
A lot of times people use
vehicles to get from this realm
to another realm.
Like, oh here's
the bus, got to go.
Can you talk about some of
those-- trains, buses, planes,
automobiles?
>>SMARTT: All of those,
and the bus stop--
take me to the bus stop.
One case was some, take
me to the bus stop.
But every vehicle you
mentioned shows up,
and sometimes more specifically.
One guy said, Jetta,
Jetta, I need my Jetta.
And the wife was like,
what is he talking about?
What's he talking about?
They couldn't figure it out.
And then finally,
they put it together.
It's, that's the car he drove.
>>REGINA: His car, Yeah.
>>SMARTT: And he loved his car.
That's the vehicle.
And so the nurse said to him,
OK, honey, you know what?
We're going to gas it up and get
it all ready for your big trip.
And that was a nurse who was
able to step into his world,
and validate, and
maybe open things up
so he could transition
more smoothly and easily.
And one of the
things that I noticed
is that, oftentimes,
they're vehicles
that are not our own agency.
So what I mean is,
they're outside.
They're buses, trains.
And up until two weeks ago, I
had not heard one person say,
I'm putting on my own shoes and
I'm going to walk somewhere.
>>REGINA: Oh, interesting.
>>SMARTT: Right, it
was an outside agency.
But just a couple weeks
ago, I got some transcripts.
And the mother said, I
want to walk with Jesus.
And then also, that's
kind of a phrase that's
right-- but still, I'm
going to go walk with Jesus.
That's the first time I
had heard more agency.
But also, with that phrase,
she was using a phrase
that she had probably heard
all her years with church.
But generally, it's
an outside vehicle
that takes them somewhere.
And they're waiting.
Their bags are packed.
And they're getting ready to go.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and while
they're getting ready to go,
and getting excited
at possibilities,
and uttering things, sometimes
it can take them back
into the past.
It can take people back into
old loves and things like this.
And so what happens
is that people
that are their current
loved ones in their life
can even feel hurt by the
detachment that the person
no longer--
they don't seem relevant
to the person anymore.
>>SMARTT: That's a very
wonderful and beautiful point
you made.
And I think, especially
with, well, with all of it,
but you know, when it's
our moms and dads or--
no, it's between
husbands and wives also.
We have this, in this point and
time, we are their special one.
But the people we love have
spanned a whole lifetime.
And we get this sense
often at threshold
they've spanned
multiple lifetimes.
>>REGINA: And what
they may be remembering
is a lovely moment
from when they
loved someone other than you.
>>SMARTT: Yes.
>>REGINA: And they
say these things.
I read one book and
interviewed one woman who
went through this
process with her husband
and the dementia prior.
And it was very difficult for
her on an emotional level.
>>SMARTT: It really,
it is difficult.
And I think this is part more
the teachings of dementia
and the end of life.
And that's a very good point.
I have heard other
stories like that.
>>REGINA: And so it's just,
we need to watch, this is--
and be respectful of the fact.
I wasn't there with them
the moment they were born.
I wasn't there.
Or maybe you were.
I mean, but they've had
their own experiences.
And other lifetimes could
even be bleeding in--
and not to put our own neediness
ahead of their experience
and not take it
personally, because it
doesn't diminish what
you've had with that person.
>>SMARTT: Yeah, I think
that's absolutely the truth--
and to make sure we're
getting support too,
because grief is devastating.
And double losses-- and we've
heard stories talking about
people finding about other--
>>REGINA: Other families.
>>SMARTT: --other
families, or other loves.
So we definitely want to be
there for those who are dying.
And we also want to make sure
we get support for ourselves
as well.
>>REGINA: Absolutely, and
also, this is kind of fun.
This area is about
how different cultures
have their own metaphors
for dying born out
of their own culture.
With Africans, they're going to
go to the goat fields, right?
>>SMARTT: Right, and some,
it's kicking off their clogs.
>>REGINA: Kicking off eternal--
the Germans go to the
eternal hunting grounds,
which of course hunting
has been a big part
of the culture for hundreds,
if not thousands of years.
Irish are going on
the path to truth.
And that's very druidic.
That puts all that beautiful
druidic spiritual knowledge
at the forefront
of their return.
>>SMARTT: Yes, that's lovely.
>>REGINA: And the Portuguese
call it going upstairs.
>>SMARTT: Yup,
which makes sense.
>>REGINA: We're
going upstairs now.
And this one was
interesting, the Dutch,
going out of the pipe.
What's that mean?
>>SMARTT: I'm not too sure,
but somehow, it feels right.
It's almost like
the tunnel image,
was the one that I had gotten.
You know, that was
my sense of it.
>>REGINA: Interesting,
this is the one
that I found the
most interesting.
Death row inmates
on lethal injections
tend to have
positive final words.
It's as though the mountain,
that mountain at the top
is better than what they've
been experiencing on this Earth.
And it's truly a relief.
>>SMARTT: Yeah, I think so.
I think that's why we're
hearing those words.
And I also think--
and I mentioned
this in the book--
that there is something
about looking back.
We may go on a trip.
And it may be terrible.
You know, there might
be bugs at the hotel.
And our car may break down.
And our Aunt was a
drunk when we saw her.
But looking back,
we're able to see
the things that were jewels.
And the whole thing
about before we die,
it's an intensified period.
And we see, really, so often,
we see what was precious
rather than what was painful.
And even with the death row
inmates, with this research,
they saw what was beautiful.
Or their words, I should--
that's probably
an overstatement.
But their language slanted more
towards positive descriptions
of their lives and the
people in their lives.
>>REGINA: And then
in your book--
I didn't read this.
There must be some
instances, I don't know,
where someone is
passing over and they
have mean or spiteful words.
Does that ever happen?
Or is it almost never?
>>SMARTT: Right before
the threshold, it's very,
very rare--
maybe a couple of weeks before.
>>REGINA: Right, of course,
kind of settling up with things.
>>SMARTT: Absolutely,
settling up--
or one woman, when she was
dying and her family was
really loud in the other
room said, will you
please quiet down?
I'm f-ing trying to die in here.
And she apparently was
a character anyway.
But as we get closer,
really the words
are generally ones of
reconciliation, and love--
>>REGINA: Beauty.
>>SMARTT: --and beauty.
It's very rare.
But a few weeks before, and even
maybe 10 days, 7 days, yeah.
When people are uncomfortable--
and there are a smaller
percentage, but there are people
more often who are afraid.
And so you might hear
more words like, help me.
I'm scared.
>>REGINA: Afraid of the unknown.
>>SMARTT: Of the unknown-- but
spitefulness really disappears.
>>REGINA: That's a--
>>SMARTT: Generally.
>>REGINA: --wonderful thing.
That's good education--
>>SMARTT: Yeah, generally,
>>REGINA: --for all of us.
>>SMARTT: --that's true.
>>REGINA: OK, so
now you have-- we
just have a few minutes left
here, some basic guidelines
that are helpful.
And you say-- and all of
which we talked about.
It's kind of like little
bullet recaps, which is,
enter the world of the person
that's dying, that you love.
Enter their world.
>>SMARTT: Enter their world.
>>REGINA: Don't try to
bring them back to yours--
>>SMARTT: Exactly.
>>REGINA: --which we're
always trying to do.
No, dad, that's not happening.
You're in a hospital right now.
No, that's not happening.
Don't do that.
>>SMARTT: Enter their world.
And you'll be surprised, or
many will be surprised by how--
what they discover.
>>REGINA: The next one is
to have eyes for the sacred.
>>SMARTT: When you walk into
a hospital room or a room
with someone who is dying, it
seems, for many of us, awful.
And it's hard to believe that
something sacred is going on.
Step into the room
as if it is sacred,
or knowing that it's sacred.
And then that allows all kinds
of possibilities to occur.
>>REGINA: Next, validate
your loved one's words
and experiences.
>>SMARTT: Yes, similar to
what we were saying before.
>>REGINA: Yes, be beautiful.
>>SMARTT: Yes, you're right.
Oh a train, the train's coming.
You lost your passport?
We'll find it for you.
>>REGINA: Yeah, and then ask
questions with authenticity
and open curiosity,
really be engaged
in an authentic way with them.
What does that green
dimension look like?
Is there anyone there-- you
know, that kind of thing,
right?
>>SMARTT: Exactly.
>>REGINA: Another thing
is to take responsibility
for the words that are
being uttered in the room.
Don't let doctors
and other people
use words like, oh,
they lost the battle.
They're losing the battle.
They'll be dead by
tomorrow morning.
Don't let that kind of
language happen in the room,
just stop that.
And so I guess my
final comment on it
is that, what it left me with--
and I think kind of like Moody's
film all those years ago,
is that the final
gift of life is dying,
the process of letting
go of life itself.
>>SMARTT: Yes, and what a
way to walk through life
and to walk through your
death or those you love.
I mean, this is such a more
sacred and comfortable way
to move through life, I think.
>>REGINA: So let it
be a celebration.
>>SMARTT: Let it
>>REGINA: Thank
you so much, Lisa.
I think your book is extremely
valuable to helping people
and helping people walk through
this stage of their own lives
and the lives of others, so
thank you for your good work.
And I wish you the best on your
expanded project in the future.
>>SMARTT: Thank you so much.
>>REGINA: Again, "Words
at the Threshold"
is the name of the book.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]